minister he is being accompanied by
chris whittie
chief medical officer boris johnson
good afternoon good afternoon two weeks
ago i updated you
from this podium on the progress we had
made as a country
in our fight against coronavirus and in
many ways that progress
continues the number of patients
admitted to hospitals is still falling
and now stands at just over 100 each day
in april there were more than 3 000
coronavirus patients in mechanical
ventilation beds but now the latest
figure
is 87 the number of deaths continues
to fall and although one is too many
that is obviously
encouraging but i've also
consistently warned that this virus
could
come back and that we would not hesitate
to take swift
and decisive action as required and
i'm afraid that in parts of asia and
latin america the virus is gathering
pace
and some of our european friends are
also struggling
to keep it under control as we see these
rises
around the world we can't fool ourselves
that we are
exempt we must be willing to react to
the first signs
of trouble today the weekly survey by
the office for national statistics
reports that the prevalence of the virus
in the community
in england is likely to be rising for
the first time
since may around one in fifteen hundred
now have the virus compared to one in
eighteen hundred on the fifteenth
of july and one in two thousand on the
second
of july the ons also estimate that there
are now
4 900 new infections every day up from
around 3 000 per day on the 14th of july
and 2 000 per day at the end of june
we just can't afford to ignore this
evidence
it's vital to stress of course that we
are in a far better position to keep the
virus
under control now than we were at the
start
of the pandemic because we know so much
more about the virus we have so many
more tools
at our disposal to deal with it our
testing capacity
has increased 100 fold we have a contact
tracing system
up and running which has led to over 184
000 people
isolating who may otherwise have spread
the virus and is capable of tracing
thousands of contacts every day we've
secured billions
of items of ppe to withstand the new
demands on hospitals and
and care homes and of course we have new
treatments pioneered in this country
like
uh dexamethasone remdesavir to shorten
recovery times and
reduce mortality rates but as i say we
cannot
be complacent and i won't stand by
and allow this virus to threaten to
cause more pain
and more heartache in our country so
that's why
last night the health secretary
announced new restrictions on household
contact in the northwest
specifically greater manchester and in
parts of east lancashire
and west yorkshire these are targeted
measures
on social contact between households
which the data tells us is driving the
current
increase in cases businesses and
workplaces
should continue as before in those areas
i know how hard it is to have
restrictions like this
imposed on seeing your family and your
friends
but we have to act rapidly in order
to protect those we love and we know
this sort of intervention
works measures taken in leicester and
luton have suppressed
the virus and allowed us to to relax
measures
even as we act locally it's also my
responsibility
to look again at the measures we have in
place nationally
in the light of the the data that we're
seeing about incidents
and you remember at every point i have
said
our plan to reopen the society and the
economy
is conditional that it relies on
continued progress against
the virus and we would not hesitate to
put the brakes on
if required with those numbers creeping
up our assessment
is that we should now squeeze that brake
pedal squeeze that brake pedal in order
to keep the virus under control on
saturday the 1st of august you'll
remember we had hoped
to reopen in england a number of the
higher risk settings
that had remained closed and today i'm
afraid we're postponing those changes
for at least a fortnight that means
until the 15th of august at the earliest
casinos bowling alleys skating rinks and
the remaining close
contact services must remain closed
indoor performances will not
resume pilots of larger crowds in sports
venues and conference centers will not
take place and wedding receptions of up
to 30 people
will not be permitted but ceremonies of
course can continue to take place
in line with coveted secure guidelines
and
i know that the steps that we're taking
will be a real blow
to many people to everyone obviously
whose wedding plans
have been disrupted or who cannot now
celebrate
eid in the way that they would
wish and i'm really really sorry about
that but we simply cannot
take the risk we will of course study
the data carefully
and move forward with our intention to
open up
as soon as we possibly can two weeks ago
i also
said that from tomorrow the government
would give employers
more discretion over how employees can
work safely whether by continuing
to work from home or attending a covered
secure workplace and we know that
employers
have gone to huge lengths to make
workplaces safe so
that guidance remains unchanged we also
said that we would
pause shielding nationally from the 1st
of august
based on clinical advice and that
national pause will proceed
as planned and our medical experts
will be explaining more about that
decision
and about the shielded group later today
most people in this country are
following the rules
and doing their best to control the
virus
but we must keep our discipline and our
focus
and we cannot be complacent i've asked
the home secretary to work with the
police
and others to ensure the rules which are
already in place
are properly enforced that means
local authorities acting to close down
premises and cancel events
which are not following kovid's secure
guidance
and it means a greater police presence
to ensure face coverings
are being worn where this is required by
law
we will also extend the requirement to
wear a face covering to other indoor
settings
where you're likely to come into contact
with people you do not normally meet
such as museums
galleries cinemas and places of worship
we now recommend face coverings are worn
in these settings and this will become
enforceable in law from the 8th of
august at this stage
we are not changing the rules on social
contact nationally
i don't want to tell people to spend
less time
with their friends but unless people
follow the rules
and behave safely we may need
to go further two weeks ago i said we
would hope for the best but
plan for the worst and of course we
continue
to hope for the best but the way to get
that and to
achieve that optimum outcome is if we
all follow the rules wash our hands
cover our faces keep our distance and
get a test if we have symptoms
so that nhs test and trace can keep the
virus
under control and that is how we will
avoid
any return to a full national lockdown
we've made huge progress together i know
we're going to succeed and i know we're
going to beat this
if each and every one of us continues
to play our part and i'll now hand over
to chris whittie
well look chris has nothing to add to
that but i'll now then
go straight to the uh to the media and i
think we're going to go
to i think we're going to go to is it's
sam coats of skye
let's go to sam coats of sky so
thank you prime minister um you you've
just described how the virus is
dramatically on the march
but also how you're going to go ahead
with guidance changes
tomorrow that lift lock down some more
to encourage employees to get back
uh to work and uh so that the vulnerable
most vulnerable can't tell their
employers that they're shielding do you
really still want people to go back to
the workplace in august and people's
back to school in september
or do you think that curbing people's
social lives will be
enough are you not risking a trade-off
between
lives and livelihoods and uh professor
witte
um after what we've seen can people
still go back to work in the coming
weeks and back to school in september
well thanks very much sam i want i want
to stress that you know what we're what
we're introducing
today in the in the north west should
not be characterized as
a return to lockdown i know that uh many
people will feel that it's
it's you know disruptive and intrusive
on their on their lives but it's it's
really a return to
some of the social distancing measures
that that we've seen before in many ways
things
uh remain opened up in uh across
across the country and you know but your
your basic point is a very good one
about
you know the trade-offs that were that
we're looking at here
and what i would say to you is i do
believe that getting our
our our children back into school on the
1st of september
uh on the 11th of august they're going
back in in scotland i think that's a
good thing uh
that should be a national priority that
should be something that we
uh we aim to deliver it's it's the right
thing for
children uh they can be educated in a
safe and a coveted secure way
we should be getting them back into
school and what we will continue to do
obviously
is institute local lockdowns in order to
stop the virus
getting out of control that's why we're
taking the measures uh that we are
and the best thing we can all do to to
stop the the spread of the virus is you
know just the the things that i've i've
already
i've already mentioned wash your hands
uh
cover your face where necessary keep
your distance hands face
space hands face space plus
uh get a test uh if you if you have
symptoms and and self-isolate
uh that's that's the way uh we're gonna
beat it
presently you want to add i'm sorry on
the shielding thing uh chris
i'll talk about shielding and also uh
the question you addressed to me
directly
um i think you know we've all known that
what we've got to try and do
is get to the absolute edge of what we
can do in terms of opening up
uh the society and the economy without
getting to the point where the virus
starts to take off again because if you
do too much
uh in terms of opening up the virus will
come back obviously if we do too little
big impacts on society big impacts in
terms of increasing uh all the effects
of
unemployment and all the things that go
with that so it is a very very difficult
balancing act
i think what we're seeing from the data
from ons and other data
is that we have probably reached near
the limits or the limits
of what we can do in terms of opening up
society so what that means
potentially is if we wish to do more
things in the future we may have to do
less of some other things and these will
be difficult trade-offs
some of which will be decisions of
government and some of which are for all
of us as citizens to do
but we have to be realistic about this
the idea that we can open up everything
and keep the virus under control is
clearly wrong
and what we're seeing as is that we are
at the outer edge
of what we can do and therefore choices
will need to be made but people
i think are very clear for example that
schools are an absolute priority for the
welfare of children
thanks very much uh christian thanks sam
poor brand of itv
thank you prime minister we're here in
the north west where there was a lot of
confusion last night about the change
in the measures as the rules become more
complex haven't you got to get better at
explaining them
and to the chief medical officer
do you think that this is the beginning
of a second wave
thanks so much paul and let's look i'm
going to put my hands up you know
immediately and say
uh of course uh we've got to make sure
that we explain things as
uh as crispy and as clearly as we can
but
paul just everybody understands what
we've got is a is a virus that
yes we as i said earlier on we've got
some drugs that are now good at uh
treating it
dexamethasone rem de severe but we don't
yet have
a vaccine the only real real utensil
we have for controlling the spread of
this new virus
is human behavior and the only way we
can
uh encourage people to behave in one way
or the other is through
advice and so you're totally right that
we need to uh to keep it as simple as we
possibly can
and that's why you know the the to sum
it up in a nutshell
it's hand space space uh uh wash your
hands
cover your face in the settings that uh
we've mentioned
and keep your distance uh from other
people where uh
you don't know them you'll come into
contact with them for the first time and
of course get a test and
and self-isolate if you if you have
symptoms i hope that was pretty
you know that that was pretty pretty
punchy i think hands-faced space
and get a test i think everybody can
more or less remember that
that's what we're we're asking everybody
uh to do uh chris
um i don't think it's probably sensible
to think about this as a second wave
that's somehow traveling around the
world these things do
those things do happen with some
epidemics rather this is a situation
where
if we go beyond a certain point in terms
of people getting together
linking up households the rates of this
virus will start to increase
and we have probably reached the limits
of that and if people continue to
increase the number of people they meet
increase the social interactions they
have
then the virus rate will go up
absolutely inevitably
so this is really within our hands as
society as to how we're going to respond
to this
we either say we've actually probably
taken it to the limit we've got to stop
now we may have to pull back a bit
in fact to keep this under control or we
do not
and if we do pull back then we should be
able to
hold the line and if we do not pull back
and we start
having further interactions then we can
expect to see
an increase in cases with all the
consequences that go with that
and thanks very much uh chris let's go
to and
and thank you paul let's go to uh lena
nathu of the bbc
thank you prime minister when you last
stood here you talked about a plan
for a significant return to normality by
christmas
now we're talking about a rise in
infections how worried are you
that this is going to turn into a surge
and why is it that we find ourselves in
this position because the government's
message has been
unclear and inconsistent or are we
all to blame and just another one if i
may including to professor witte
did we move too fast with the loosening
of restrictions
well thanks very much uh layla the let's
be
uh clear i've said the throughout the
uh the pandemic that there would be
fresh outbreaks i think from
uh from may i think uh i i said when we
set out our
plan i said we would not hesitate to put
on the brakes at the slightest
sign that the numbers were going in the
wrong direction
uh we're now seeing uh a warning light
on the dashboard it is right to respond
in
the way that we are and uh as chris
has has rightly said the answer lies
with all of us
uh following that guidance and and
and doing the the right thing i'm gonna
repeat it hands face
uh space uh get a test and uh
if we do that i've got absolutely no
doubt that we will continue to bring it
down we know
it was very telling that in in leicester
in in luton uh in many other places
around the country
where they've had an outbreak uh they've
put in place
measures they've they've got on top of
it they've got tough they've asked
people to self-isolate
and that is working and you're seeing
the incidents come down again
so that's how we get back uh to
as close to normal as possible as i said
two weeks ago it's by maintaining
discipline and maintaining focus
hands face space get a test
in terms of whether it was too fast
every society is having to test how fast
we can open up
and there are clearly big disadvantages
to opening things up in the winter
months where everything is against us
they benefit the virus and they
disadvantage the health service and the
nhs
specifically so i think what what has
clearly happened is ministers decided to
go in a very staged way
and that's allowed stopping things if
the system does not allow and that's
what's happening today that's what the
prime minister has just
announced is actually by going in stages
you can stop
at certain points and say actually this
is a perfectly sensible thing to think
about but
looking at the data now this does not
look like a sensible step to take at
this point in time
thanks very much uh leela and and thank
you chris john
stevens dailymail thank you prime
minister um
you said that you still want more
workers to return to the office from the
start of august but after warnings about
the second
wave and these latest restrictions some
people might be feeling slightly
apprehensive
what's your message to them and quickly
what are your own plans for the summer
uh well uh john i can i can say i i will
be i will be
working flat out as you can imagine
though i may i may allow a brief
staycation
uh to creep into the uh the agenda if
that's possible
uh but um you know on your on the point
about
what should people do in the message for
uh for from
employees and all our workforce in the
country it's it's
it's it's what uh you know you and i
have discussed uh before i want to see
people
uh discussing with their employers
whether they can work from home lots of
people can work from home you know
a lot of people discover that it does
work but if employers think and their
employees think that actually
uh to get in uh you need to be
productive you need to be at your place
of work then
you know that's a very very important
consideration and it is safe to
get into a covered secure workplace
people should understand that
and that is our guidance but i think we
should just be really grateful that
huge numbers of employers have put an
awful lot of effort into trying to make
workplaces covered secure
it is absolutely essential that
everybody does that
but the great majority are and then when
that happens people stick to
the guidance and the rules they're given
and and
john it goes without saying that you
know if if people feel that their
workplace isn't secure
then the you know the the hsc the health
and safety executive is that uh
to enforce it is that you know if
employers don't keep their
workplaces covered secure then that's a
matter that can be enforced in in law
and we will come down hard on people who
are
who are not doing the right thing but as
chris says you know
the the uh businesses firms in our
country have done a fantastic job
of of adapting to to covert and will
continue
to do so harry cole of the thanks very
much harry cole of the sun
thank you prime minister um thousands of
our readers have had their european
holidays
uh ruined this summer and now with the
southwest having a similar rh as the
north
west our staycation's in doubt what's
your message to people who are
who are scared about possibly traveling
around this country
spreading the virus or catching it have
you just cancelled summer
uh uh no harry uh i i don't think so
i would encourage people still to uh
think of wonderful staycations here in
the
in the uk uh there are all sorts of
fantastic
destinations the best in the best in the
world uh i would say for
all my happiest holiday memories are of
uh
of uh of of holiday vacations
here in the in the uk uh bucket and
spade jobs or
or whatever uh and i thoroughly
thoroughly recommend it
and i i'm sure that people will have a
great time over the summer
thank you uh let's go to let's go to to
rob parsons of the
of the yorkshire uh post
prime minister uh a conservative mp in
one of the affected areas of west
yorkshire
says local baeme communities are not
taking this seriously enough
and that until people take it seriously
we're not going to get rid of this
pandemic do you agree with him on that
point and on a separate topic given
all the problems in care homes if
there's a big upturn in cases and
hospital admissions over the winter
either in northern england or elsewhere
can you provide
an absolute guarantee that no one will
be discharged from hospital
to a care home or their own home if they
are positive for covered
which would obviously mean all patients
being tested before they're discharged
uh yes well thanks thanks rob i'm on the
second point absolutely
uh as far as i know we'll make sure that
uh there is you know error
there are no uh discharges into into
care homes of people who
uh who test positive and we will be
testing uh everybody in
uh both asymptomatically and otherwise
uh in
in care homes as you know uh but on your
on your on your first point about
um you know how the are certain
community communities
uh responding enough to the to the
guidance well i think it's up to
all of us in in government to to make
sure that the message is being heard
loud and clear by everybody
across the country and to make sure that
everybody
is complying with the guidance and a
huge amount of effort is now
going into that and uh you know i i want
to thank all the the community leaders i
want to thank uh
everybody the mosques the imams who've
worked hard with us to
uh to to get messages across all faith
leaders
uh and other communities getting that
message across
uh throughout society and um
but ultimately you know it's up to
everybody it's it's the
it's up to the whole country to get this
right and
to do it together and um
uh you know what my message is going to
be uh it's it's hands-faced space
uh though and and get a test if you have
uh if you have symptoms
and self-isolate if everybody does that
we will find this thing much much easier
to defeat and we will defeat it and and
it's by working together collectively
that we will get this done
chris anything to add to that listen
thank you all
thank you all very much uh indeed and
uh hands face space
get a test self-isolate if you have
symptoms
thanks very much boris johnson
[Music]
see the headlines as they happen and
watch bbc news live in the app and get
the full story with bbc
dot co dot uk forward slash news follow
the story for all the latest with bbc
news